























































































































abandoned in the center?” he inquired, searching with his eyes for
“A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your
above his head: “Captain Túshin! Captain!”
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
action did Prince Bagratión, still hearing the cannonade in the center,
activity, Túshin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of
a desperate cry and such mad, drunken determination that, taken by
a dinner where there was no place for him. In the next hut there was a
After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on
after troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty
“Ah! Breathing again, breathing!” he muttered to himself.
air, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation which decided the fate
alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holding his breath,
all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation, he
“All right, all right,” replied the commander, and turned to Major
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the
all this end?” thought Rostóv, looking at the changing shadows before
All were silent. Túshin appeared at the threshold and made his way
always dragging it in one direction. He tried to get away from them, but
(always followed by a ball flying past and striking the earth, a man, a
always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound of
Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him
among them the staff officer and Zherkóv, who had been twice sent to
and abruptly.
and began firing them at Túshin’s battery.
and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge, but with the
and could not answer. “Can something bad have happened to me?”
and dismounted slowly among the guns. He delivered the order and did
and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine. But the mere thought
and his lips were smiling. Though the commander was occupied in giving
“And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion,” he
Andrew.
Andrew went out with him.
and running so lightly, frightened Rostóv. He seized his pistol and,
and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present
And they disappeared into the darkness with their load.
and took hold of the commander’s stirrup, almost leaning against him.
and with a hooked nose. Then came two more, and many more running
and without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
an excruciating pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory
an exemplary officer of twenty-two years’ service, who had never been
“A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellow
another, they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed,
Antónov.”
apologizing for the state of his gun.
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand,
“Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you...”
around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on his heels, held
artillery company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad
artilleryman to Prince Andrew. “Not like your honor!”
artilleryman, wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if
artillerymen, Túshin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they
a seventy-pound weight were tied to it. He could run no more. The
asked and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a
“A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off,” said an
as their officer—all looked at their commander like children in an
attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him,
at them.
at them and hack them to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful
awaited their fate. The firing died down and soldiers, talking eagerly,
a white horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing:
ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.
band, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Túshin and his company,”
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one
been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
before him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There
beginning of the action.) “I think I sent you?” he added, turning to
behind. One of them said something strange, not in Russian. In among the
best of officers could do in his position, he was in a state akin to
better not look,” he thought, but having reached the bushes he glanced
blood on it. “Ah, here are people coming,” he thought joyfully,
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay
body. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by
Bolkónski, who spoke with suppressed agitation.
breeches and arm.
brightening up.
broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses.
broke up two squares, your excellency.”
But Dólokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around his
but only changed character. The horses were replaced by others from a
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon
by someone’s order, the battery had continued firing and was only not
by the fire. One of them stumbled.
“By the way, your excellency, I should inform you,” he
cadet, supporting one hand with the other, came up to Túshin and asked
came a man wearing a strange shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned,
cannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on the
cannon balls at the French with both hands.
can’t understand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only
“Captain, for God’s sake! I’ve hurt my arm,” he said timidly.
captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
censured, should not be held to blame.
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XXI
close by, who heard him muttering.
closer together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt:
close that the expression of his face could be seen. And the excited,
clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped to
“Come along, our Matvévna!” he said to himself. “Matvévna” *
come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked at
come on and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion’—and
“Coming, friend.”
commiseration on Rostóv, who saw that Túshin with his whole heart
company, which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having
company, your honor. I don’t know where... such bad luck!”
confused him still more. He stood before Bagratión with his lower
confusion what did or did not happen?
continually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of range
continued—remembering Dólokhov’s conversation with Kutúzov and his
continued, “we owe today’s success chiefly to the action of that
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he,
could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended
countrymen. Thanks for the fire—we’ll return it with interest,”
crackling of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.
cried at each shot: “Fine! That’s good! Look at it... Grand!” The
dark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous. The
    * Daughter of Matthew.
dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his
dear fellow!” and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his
Denísov with his voice and mustache, and Telyánin and all that affair
descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides
devoid of any foundation. Prince Bagratión turned to the old colonel:
direction of the conflagration. As if urging each other on, the soldiers
disorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: ‘I’ll let them
distorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishing of
distrust in Bolkónski’s emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully
down. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his
drink?”
driver’s leg. Their spirits once roused were, however, not diminished,
drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the
each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated
eager questions from all sides. The whole moving mass began pressing
Ekonómov.
embarrassing situation, and the expression on his face was invariably
evidently those in front had halted. All remained where they were in the
excellency!”
excellency... I had no men... your excellency.”
expression, though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie
eyes.
faces of the crew bustling round the guns, from the sight of the blood
family’s, and his friends’, and the enemy’s intention to kill him
fear, and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never
feeble voice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and
feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single sentiment, that
feverish delirium or drunkenness.
field. Instead of the moving horses and hussars’ backs, he saw nothing
figure of Túshin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him.
fingers twitched nervously.
fire, fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The French columns
fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his whole
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Túshin,
flank; he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at the very
fluttering in that light. Túshin had not returned, the doctor had not
For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things
for a seat.
“For God’s sake... I can’t walk. For God’s sake!”
for him, Prince Bagratión sat at dinner, talking with some commanding
for negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the
for the most part handsome fellows and, as is always the case in an
for this failure, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village
French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons. Our officers
French, he did not know. There was no one near.
Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostóv closed his eyes and stooped
Frenchmen, and though but a moment before he had been galloping to get
French to pass him, had made a bayonet charge with two battalions and
French to suppose that here—in the center—the main Russian forces
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle and
from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing the
from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.
fugitives returned, the battalions re-formed, and the French who had
generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the
general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a
“Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically:
“Give him a seat,” said Túshin. “Lay a cloak for him to sit on,
glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the signet
gloom, but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm.
“Good-by, my dear fellow,” said Túshin. “Dear soul! Good-by, my
Grand! Look at the smoke, the smoke!” exclaimed the artillerymen,
groans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night.
gun, a horse), from the sight of all these things a fantastic world of
guns. On the contrary, the energetic action of that battery led the
guns on the hillock.
guns smashed, and no supports at all.”
had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour
had broken up the French troops.
had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and that the corner
had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces
had never been to blame, might be held responsible at headquarters
has blundered looks at an examiner.
having become entangled in the saddle. Where our men were, and where the
Having disentangled his leg, he rose. “Where, on which side, was now
Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind
having given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressing
head in perplexity—perhaps because the banner really interested him,
head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
he had not thought about it until that moment. The officers’ laughter
“He has been set down. He died,” replied someone.
He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwing
“Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,
He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung less
He paused, and just as he was about to say something more, another ball
“He’s dead—why carry him?” said another.
he wondered as he got up: and at that moment he felt that something
him out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice:
him pleasure. The enemy’s guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes
him. The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible
hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Russian hussar. He
his eyes. “Can they be French?” He looked at the approaching
his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.
his own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded
his saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talking, firing into the
his usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to
hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of the
“How was it a gun was abandoned?” asked Bagratión, frowning, not so
humming infantry as by a frame.
hung low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growing
“I...”
“I... don’t...” he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap.
“I had not the pleasure of seeing you,” said Prince Andrew, coldly
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged
In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and
increasing, seemed like someone’s breathing. He listened intently to
individual commanders and inquiring into details of the action and our
infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. It
infantry, cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were
infantry officer who just before the battle had rushed out of
informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn
instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and ran with all his
instructions to Major Ekonómov, he could not help taking notice of the
intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Túshin from under his brows and his
In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing
In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck in
in Zherkóv, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all
“I saw the Pávlograd hussars attack there, your excellency,” chimed
is so fond of?” He remembered his mother’s love for him, and his
it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
“It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the
it was impossible to get rid of them.
It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space
“It was the officer, your honor, stained it,” answered the
it were not his. He examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to find
It would not ache—it would be well—if only they did not pull it, but
jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter: “I don’t know... your
jump, Túshin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun,
just left.... It is true that it was hot there,” he added, modestly.
killed.” Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his
kill me.” But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if
knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon
lad,” he said, addressing his favorite soldier. “And where is the
lain in ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly.
last interview with the gentleman-ranker—“that Private Dólokhov,
last remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and
laughed loudest.
leaping the furrows, he fled across the field with the impetuosity he
letting the retreating companies pass by them, when a soldier came up
Little Túshin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to
“Look at them scurrying! It’s burning! Just see the smoke! Fine!
losses. The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau was
“Matvévna’s” carriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar
“Matvévna,” the gun from which they had removed the dead officer.
middle of the muddy road.
might toward the bushes. He did not now run with the feeling of doubt
missed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and at any
moment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without any apparent
more animated. Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and
much at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkóv
“Must one die like a dog?” said he.
nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed. Our
Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passed
“No, it’s a sprain.”
Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared
Nothing could be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn’t there something to
“Nothing... only a shell...” he answered.
“Not hurt, Petróv?” asked one.
noticed the French appearing below them, and then they fired grapeshot
not leave the battery. He decided to have the guns removed from their
not rise. Rostóv also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache
not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannon
now aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing
“Now look out for the ball... we’ll throw it back.”
now,” said another.
“Now then, Matvévna, dear old lady, don’t let me down!” he was
occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. It
of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.
of being afraid roused him again. “I cannot be afraid,” thought he,
“Of course, we only just missed one another,” said the staff
off, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the
of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his whole being. Rapidly
officers who had gathered at his quarters. The little old man with
officer, with a smile to Bolkónski.
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
of men and horses, from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy’s side
often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movement.
of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground. Though he
of the night. The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their
of the second gun’s crew was “uncle”; Túshin looked at him more
of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and
of voices, the tramping feet, the horses’ hoofs moving in mud, the
“Oh, but you were there?” said Prince Bagratión, addressing Prince
(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
“One was damaged,” answered the staff officer, “and the other I
Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt
on which Rostóv sat.
or cap, his head was bandaged, and over his shoulder a French munition
order.
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and
pale and his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed on
pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes.
perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at
position. He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire,
positions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with Túshin, stepping
pouch was slung. He had an officer’s sword in his hand. The soldier
powder smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at that
presence and particularly distinguished himself.”
Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt
Prince Andrew said nothing to Túshin. They were both so busy as to seem
Prince Bagratión and Túshin looked with equal intentness at
Prince Bagratión looked at Túshin, evidently reluctant to show
ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.
ran up, begging a little fire for the infantry.
reached the bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.
realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the
reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above
“refill my pipe for that one!” and then, scattering sparks from it,
reflected on theirs.
regimental commander and Major Ekonómov had stopped beside a bridge,
reprimanding and reproaching him. Túshin gave no orders, and,
reserve gun carriage, the wounded were carried away, and the four guns
reserve units were able to join up, and the fight was at an end. The
“Retire! All to retire!” he shouted from a distance.
retreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered the
rider’s leg. Blood was flowing from his head; he struggled but could
rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of shot gleamed in
right sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Túshin with his guns,
ring, and Zherkóv, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,
Rostóv looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and
round once more. The French had fallen behind, and just as he looked
round the first man changed his run to a walk and, turning, shouted
running beside Timókhin, killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was
running? Can they be coming at me? And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone
sad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
said a gunner, coming up to Túshin.
said he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.
saying as he moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice called
seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the situation.
seeing some men running toward him. “They will help me!” In front
seemed impossible. “But perhaps they may do it!” For more than ten
seemed to him like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One
seemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost a day, since he
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
senseless cry, “Cut off!” that is so terrible in battle, and that
setting fire to Schön Grabern.
seventeen of the forty men of the guns’ crews had been disabled, but
several dead men. One ball after another passed over as he approached
Several of those present smiled at Zherkóv’s words, expecting one of
sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was Timókhin’s
shouted hoarsely.
“Shut up!”
sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and
silently—fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to
“Smack at ‘em, lads!” he kept saying, seizing the guns by the
small cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by
soldier.
soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostóv, too, dragged himself to the
soldier with the harsh voice, and it was that affair and this soldier
Someone mentioned that Captain Túshin was bivouacking close to the
someone. (Prince Bagratión did not ask about the guns on the left
something loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostóv paused. “No,
Sónya’s thin little shoulders, Natásha’s eyes and laughter,
Soon after Prince Bagratión had left him, Túshin had succeeded in
so terrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance
spoke in abrupt sentences. “The whole company can bear witness. I beg
station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a bonfire the
“Still aching?” Túshin asked Rostóv in a whisper.
stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
stopped the company.” Dólokhov breathed heavily from weariness and
streamed out of a side street.
stumbled over it. Several of those present laughed.
successfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this
superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if
superior.
surprise, the French had thrown down their muskets and run. Dólokhov,
“Surrounded! Cut off? We’re lost!” shouted the fugitives.
take me too? Who are these men?” thought Rostóv, scarcely believing
“Tell them to give me a seat, for God’s sake!”
than a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling snow were
“Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!” said Túshin.
that day, but had heard about them from an infantry officer. “They
that had advanced beyond the village went back; but as though in revenge
that he could not believe his eyes. “Who are they? Why are they
that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill
that’s what I did.”
that were so agonizingly, incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and
the accountant with the naïve face was feeling its texture, shaking his
the artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they
the battery to retire as quickly as possible. When the supports attached
the bonfire, and addressing Túshin asked him to have the guns moved a
The cadet was Rostóv. With one hand he supported the other; he was
the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately, each trying
the case, hesitated about lifting the injured or dead. The soldiers,
The cloak they spread under him was wet with blood which stained his
the complete darkness Túshin’s guns moved forward, surrounded by the
the copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
the darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers
the ebb and flow of these sounds.
the fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers
the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his collar. Our
The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, was already so
The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again and again in
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed
the glory of our arms and of the day’s work, they assumed a serious
the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts
the line that had so sharply divided the two armies?” he asked himself
The man was wearing a bluish coat of broadcloth, he had no knapsack
The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the general
themselves to Túshin in all their horror. He had been so excited that
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg
“Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?” inquired Túshin.
the orders were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves
the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunately
“There... he’s puffing again,” muttered Túshin to himself, as a
there’s some mistake,” thought he. “They can’t have wanted to
The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagratión, apparently not wishing
the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder. To
The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the same
The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishing, now
the staff officer on duty.
the village again, but Túshin’s guns could not move, and the
the wind.
The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,
they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair’s breadth.
thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the
thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years’ service who
thud of the enemy’s cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring
timidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past the
Timókhin, armed only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such
to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to
to credit it, bent his head, and told Túshin that he could go. Prince
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps
to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to.
to the French sword and pouch. “I have taken an officer prisoner. I
to the removal of the guns.
to Túshin’s battery had been moved away in the middle of the action
trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed to
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagratión as a schoolboy who
turn away from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always
Túshin.
Túshin did not say that there were no covering troops, though that
Túshin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight,
Túshin’s battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one
Túshin’s battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the
Túshin’s large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and
Túshin’s wattle shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on
Túshin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier
Túshin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned
unwounded—it was they who were crushing, weighing down, and twisting
up to Túshin.
used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his good-natured, pale,
village and had already been sent for.
voice, “you were pleased to send me to Captain Túshin’s battery. I
walked away from the fire.
was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him.
was large and of an old pattern. The French swarming round their guns
was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently into the commander’s face,
was perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer into
was the name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which
was warm blood under his arm. “No, I am wounded and the horse is
weep without knowing why—rode behind on his artillery nag. Though
“Well, till we meet again...” he said, holding out his hand to
went there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two
were concentrated. Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on
were flocking in to look at him. Prince Bagratión was thanking the
were turned against the ten-gun battery. Túshin’s companion officer
were walking, driving past, and settling down all around. The sound
“We’ve given it ‘em hot, mate! They won’t make another push
“What, are you wounded, my lad?” said Túshin, approaching the gun
“What did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?” came
“What do you want, your honor?” asked an artilleryman, standing
wheels and working the screws himself.
“When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was
where Túshin’s guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a
which seemed to him dazzlingly red, and at the feeble, round-shouldered
“Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will
who had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of
“Who the devil has put the logs on the road?” snarled he.
who was reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my
“Why are they down on me?” thought Túshin, looking in alarm at his
wished to help him but could not.
with Telyánin and Bogdánich. That affair was the same thing as this
with the physical pain. It was they, these soldiers—wounded and
With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to
word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic.
wounded officer?”
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness
“Yes.”
“You couldn’t see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows!
“You don’t mind your honor?” he asked Túshin. “I’ve lost my
“You might have taken some from the covering troops.”
young face to look back. A shudder of terror went through him: “No,
“You picked it up?... I dare say! You’re very smart!” one of them
“Your excellency, here are two trophies,” said Dólokhov, pointing
“Your excellency!” Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt
“Your honor, you’re wanted by the general. He is in the hut here,”
you will remember this, your excellency!”
